Today's video is brought to you by audible star listening with a
30 day audible trial. Choose one audio book and two audible originals.
Absolutely free visit audible.com/biographics or text
biographics to 500,
500 more on them in a bit as well as a book recommendation from me
on October the third, 1863,
a delegation of Mexican aristocrats arrived in trit on a secret mission.
For the last few years,
their country had been convulsed by violence between its liberal and
conservative factions.
The economy was in free fall and foreign troops were occupying Mexican soil,
but it wasn't military help that the delegation had come to seek.
They were looking for an emperor,
a European willing to come to Mexico and rule their nation as an absolute
dictator, infer and Maximilian. They found their man,
the brother of Austrian emperor friends,
Joseph Maximilian couldn't have been a more unlikely candidate for the job.
He was a natural liberal unversed in Mexican affairs,
more interested in art than in nation building yet this historical wet blanket
somehow wounds up ruling Mexico as head of an empire in today's
biographics we're lifting the lids on one of these strangest stories in
political history and exploring the minds of a man who tried to make Mexico
a monarchy.
It's the fate of many younger brothers to feel they're spending their lives in
the shadow of their older sibling.
But few have ever felt that sense of inadequacy as keenly as maxil
born Archduke Fe ends maxil in Vienna on the 6th of July,
1832 maxil was a mere two years younger than his brother, France, Joseph,
but while most older brothers might be showoffs at sports, say France,
Joseph had a much more annoying claim to superiority.
He was going to be the emperor of Austria.
That would impressive enough if Austria was the small European nation that it is
today, but in the 19th century, this was really serious business back then,
Austria included not just Austria, proper, but modern day, Hungary,
Czech Republic, Slovakia, Slovenia, and Croatia, plus parts of Italy, Poland,
Ukraine, Serbia, and Romania. It was a Europe superpower,
and maxil had missed outs on being the big boss of all of it.
By 23 months still what Maximilian lost in future responsibilities.
He made up for, with freedom. What our friends,
Joseph was firmly placed on a path marked duty.
God army Maximilian was allowed to make his own choices that meant getting into
art into the works of radical thinkers.
By the time he reached his teenage years,
maxilla was as liberal and as conscientious as his older brother was stayed
and conservative,
but any political rift between the two was blocked by huge events that can be
summed up by two little numbers, 1848.
If you've watched our other 19th century videos you'll know that 1848 is the
year that we keep coming back to again and again, and again,
if you haven't just imagine Europe as this rickety house of cards,
barely able to keep standing got that in your lines will now see a gigantic
wrecking ball swinging towards that house of cards.
That is 1848.
That January a revolution in France turned into a contagion of liberal
revolution that swept Europe and Austria and uprising in Vienna got so violent
that the Royal family was forced to flee the city. As liberal belief,
maxil fled with them and stayed fled until the army had pacified the city.
Although the 1848 revolutions were quashed by the end of 1849,
they did have some very important consequences in Austria,
the emperor abdicated and passed the throne to maxillas old brother, friends,
Joseph then Amir 18 years old,
but there were also consequences in France consequences that will have an impact
on our narrative in the near future. After a year of turmoil, uh,
populous laughing stock dismissed by elites rose up to win a supposedly
rubber stamp election and become president.
His name was Louis Napoleon Bonna apart nephew of the original Napoleon Bonna
apart, but history we've soon come to know him as emperor Napoleon II.
It was thanks to him that Maximilian would go from random Austrian Archduke to
dictator of Mexico.
The next few years was spent with friends, Joseph instituting,
a Neo absolute regime in Austria while his liberal brother did what most kids
with too much money and too few responsibilities do travel the world and sleep
with lots of people. At one point,
Maximilian fell in love with a German Countess only to be told by his brother
that she was beneath him and that they had to break off the relationship at
another.
He fell in love with a Portuguese noble woman only for her to die before
friends, Joseph could even get around to shutting that relationship down.
Finally in 1854,
perhaps hoping to knock some responsibility into his sibling friends.
Joseph made Maximilian rear Admiral of the Austrian Navy.
This turned out to be a surprisingly good move while it certainly possible that
Maximilian could have immediately converted the flagship versus into a floating
Oland disgraced, the entire family. He instead took to his new job,
like a boat to water. He was inquisitive and energetic, willing to listen.
A born reformer in the two short years, Maximilian was in charge of it.
The Austrian Navy completely modernized,
no doubt surprised by his brother's success. Friends,
Joseph then made Maximilian governor general,
the kingdom of Lombardi Venetia today, part of Italy,
but back then firmly with an Austria.
But if the emperor was hoping for a repeats of the Navy reforms,
he was about to be sorely disappointed. There are many reasons Lombardi.
Venetia is today in Italy,
but one of them is the Maximilian rules with a hopelessly light touch.
While this was pretty sweet from the perspective of the locals,
it was less good from the perspective of Austria in 1859,
furious at his brother's liberal reforms, France,
Joseph remove maxilla from his post. Only a couple of months later,
Lombardi Venetia had been into what was by now,
well on its way to becoming modern Italy and Austrian rule of the region,
it was over by the way,
one of the guys who helped facilitate this transition of power,
that would be Napoleon III,
who landed a massive French army in the region to stop friends,
Joseph winning it back landing massive armies on other people's countries.
While we are going to BCA Napoleon II, doing that a lot in this video,
after the debacle of Lombardi, Venetia, Maximilian,
retreated to his palace near tri and spent the next few months trying to stay
out of his brother's bad books. This meant concentrating on his new wife,
19 year old, Charlotte of Belgium and organizing occasional trips to Brazil.
But don't go thinking the maxil was out of the Royal loop throughout 1859.
A number of European countries contacted him,
asking him if he'd like to take the throne as leader of their nations.
This wasn't unusual at the time, back in 1832, for example,
Greece had imported a random German prince to be their ruler.
It was kind of just how Europe brought, but not the Americas,
which is what made, what happened next, quite so confusing.
As the 1850s drew to a close maxil got one Royal offer.
It's extremely unlikely.
He was expecting a group of Mexican aristocrats contacted the Archduke,
sounding him out about becoming emperor of Mexico.
Although maxil turned them down,
something about the strange offer must have stuck with him just four years
later.
Those Mexican aristocrats would try again this time maxil would say
yes. So just before we get into the rest of today's video,
I do wanna take a quick moment to tell you about audible.
Now you guys have probably heard of audible year on the internet, so well,
I'm pretty sure you have,
they have the largest selection of audio books in the world bar none.
Now, normally I'm supposed to recommend a book that is related to today's video,
but that's not really how life works.
The history of Mexico hasn't been on my list lately,
but I will recommend something that I'm actually listening to,
which is a bit pulled in the plaque. It's by a chap called Stephen Levy.
He's great. You've probably heard of other books by him.
And the book is a great look inside how Google works.
I know it's a bit random for this video,
but it's a great book that I would thoroughly recommend and you can check it out
for free.
So start with audible using our link below and you get a 30 day free trial
and you can use that trial to get that book and get that book unless you've
already read it a case.
You can go ahead and get something about the history of Mexico or whatever.
Like I say, biggest selection in the world every month with audible,
you get one credit and you can get a book of any value for that credit in
the plaques is 19 hours long. That's good value.
Plus you get two audible originals, which you can't get anywhere else.
Plus exchange a book. If you don't like it,
plus you get to keep all the books you get forever. Plus listen,
anywhere on any device, audible is just the best. Go get it right now,
30 day free trial link below. And let's go back to the video.
All right. So at this point you might be thinking, well,
why did Mexico actually need an emperor?
Did they just want the fancy ceremonies and stuff? And this is a fair question,
especially since the role of emperor had been abolished in Mexico,
way back in 1824, to answer it,
we're gonna take a quick detail through Mexican history as seen through the eyes
of the third key player in today's video,
Benito ho born on March the 21st 1806 Quez came from rural indigenous
stock in the Oaxaca region. In the days of the Spanish empire as today,
actually rural and in indigenous were often interchangeable with poor and horror
grew up in biting poverty. His parents died when he was three and at 12,
he left home to make something of himself.
But first he had to survive a period of world changing upheaval.
Mexico in 18,
18 was 80 years into its war of independence from the Spanish crown in 1821,
that war was won and Mexico became an actual thing,
but this didn't mean stability. Oh no. Rather it meant chaos,
lots and lots of chaos with a side of mayhem between
1821 and 1861,
Mexico would go through 75 governments and average of nearly two per
year. Still, even this else couldn't keep Benito Juez from rising to the top.
By 1829, he had given up his priesthood training to become a lawyer.
This led in 1831 to his election,
to a municipal council where it became famous for being honest and UN
unpretentious. Then it was onto a position as a judge in 1841.
And then in 1847 election, as Oaxaca governor,
as governor GUAS began to believe Mexican society was irreparably broken by the
Catholic church and the land owning classes. He was so vocal about this,
that when the conservatives came to power in 1853 Juez was forced to flee the
country. Still prepo Mexican politics never sat still for long.
And in 1855 around the time max million was modernizing,
the Austrian army liberals were back in power and asking for jus to
return and be the justice minister.
It was an appointment that would unleash a wave of reform jus authored,
or was attached to bills that broke up larger states that abolished special
courts for the clergy that ended the practice of religious marriages in Mexico
by 1857 was so well respected among liberals that they made him head of the
Supreme court, a posting that also technically made him vice president.
This turned out to be a really important move. Okay.
So let's skip ahead to 1858 over in Europe maxil is messing up ruling Lombardi
Venetia. While in Mexico,
the conservatives are fed up with all of this reform that's going on in January.
They rose up against the government, throwing the president out.
It was the beginning of a civil war known as the reform war,
but it was also the beginning of bonito horror as VP horrors now has a
legitimate claim on the presidency. So he fled Mexico. So Avera Cruz,
where he raised an army to fight the conservatives and fight them.
He did in January, 1861,
horrors forced the conservatives out of the Capitol and had himself declared the
president of Mexico.
But the unrest was far from over the conservative forces were still out there
and the economy was in free fall. It was against this background.
Juez made a fate decision to save money.
He decided to suspend Mexico's debt repayments to its foreign creditors,
along with Spain and Britain.
One of those foreign creditors just happened to be France and Napoleon III was
like the mafia in one very important respect,
forget to pay your debts to him and to make sure that you lost everything
In the end. It was a simple conversation that decided max million strange fate,
while in exile in Europe,
staunch conservative Jose Manuel Hidalgo E za just happened to fall
talking to Napoleon the third Spanish wife <inaudible> casual. Like he,
he mentioned that Benito Juez could be driven from power and France's debts
repaid by a European backed Mexican Monarch U beautifully listens
then went back to her husband and told him of the idea.
It was like Louis Napoleon had suddenly seen the light up until now.
The emperor of France had been contemplating some sort of joint invasion with
Spain and Britains Naqui the rounds and get their money back.
But now he realized he could set up a puppet ruler in Mexico city.
Why stop with just lining his pockets? Okay.
So it's probably time that we delved a little bit into Napoleon II to try and
figure out why he was so into this idea. Born in 1808,
Napoleon II had spent his early childhood as royalty within the first French em
empire, but it'd come of age in the aftermath of the empire collapse.
When his uncle Napoleon, the first was exile,
the French monarchy restored and the Bonna pants all chased out of France.
So you know how Maximilian grew up in his brother's shadow? Well,
Louis Napoleon spent his life in the shadow of his uncle, the actual Napoleon,
possibly the biggest shadow ever cast. Unlike Maximilian though,
Napoleon was determined to eclipse his famous relative throughout the 1830s.
The future Emper launched aborted co after aborted co in France,
all of them badly thought out and all of them failures. In fact,
they failed so badly that everyone thought that he was a bit of a joke.
He was never executed for treason. He was just jailed or exile.
The result was Louis.
Napoleon was still alive when 1848 rolled arounds and able to take advantage of
the chaos unleashed to win France's first ever presidential election.
Not long after that,
he launched his final coup ended French democracy and made himself em,
while he may have succeeded in netting, his uncle's title of emperor.
He had none of his legendary military victories over the next few years,
Napoleon III tried his best changed that there was the intervention in Lodi
Venetia just after Maximilian left the post. There was also the Crimean war,
but there was nothing that would fix his name in the history box.
Nothing that would make future historians go Napoleon. You mean the third,
right? You know,
the best Napoleon that all changed in April, 1861 that month,
the us civil war erupted and suddenly the superpower keeping the Europeans out
of the new world was otherwise engaged almost immediately.
Louie Napoleon began putting diplomatic pressure on Texas toed from the
Confederacy and become a French protected Republic. When that failed,
he fixed his attention on Mexico. We've seen some speculation that the,
the third's end goal was to get a foothold in the Americas while the us was in
chaos. Some have even suggested that he might have been hoping to reclaim French
Louisiana, the territory, his uncle sold to the Americans in 1803.
And what better way to achieve that than by installing some loyal idiot as a
client emperor in Mexico on January the eighth, 1862, 10,000 French,
Spanish and British troops landed in Vera Cruz and attacked Mexico,
despite some initial bad defeats and Britain and Spain pulling outta the fight
by the 31st of May,
1863 Benito Quez had been forced to flee the capital and Mexico was largely
under French control. Not long after on October the third,
a delegation of Mexican aristocrats arrived in Trias to offer maxil the Mexican
crown, the newly reconstituted Mexican empire had just found its new emperor.
What's remarkable today about max millions. Ascensions on the Mexican throne.
Isn't just how unlikely it was.
Seriously take out any one of these parts and the whole thing never happens,
but what a clearly bad puppet ruler, he was from the very get go.
The Mexican aristocrats visioning a medieval star king to protect their land,
the church and crush the liberals Napoleon.
The third was envisaging a pliable idiot.
Who'd allow him to project French power into the new world. Instead,
Maximilian insisted.
He would only take the throne on the condition that the people of Mexican voted
for him to do.
So you can always imagine the rich Mexicans looking each other and being like,
ah, still max maxil refused to budge on this requirement.
So with enough eye rolling to generate its own electricity,
Napoleon III organized a sham, referendum,
rigged the results and then presented them to maxil as proof that the peasants
wanted to in charge,
thus convinced maxil set sale for his new empire on April the 10th, 1864,
there was just one problem.
Napoleon thei sham election hadn't convinced Maximilian and his wife.
It had really actually convinced them like they really thought Mexico's poor
were crying out for their guiding hands.
And that meant they desperately wanted to protect those Mexican peasants from
exploitation,
maxilla and Charlotte have named now changed to Carlotta arrived in Mexico on
may the 27th to cheering crowds of conservative supporters.
They moved into chip pack castle,
which had been redecorated to look like a Royal European home.
A pretend court had been set up for them full of ladies in waiting everyone
expected Maximilian to start ruling like his Neo absolutist brother.
Instead the new emperor of Mexico immediately turned around and not just bit the
hands that was feeding him,
but tore it right off rather than whip the country into solid conservative
shape.
Maximilian's first decrees were to preserve Benito horror's liberal reforms.
This included the breaking up of the church's lands,
the separation of church and state the outlawing of surf him.
You can just imagine the dawning realization of the faces of the Mexican
aristocrats. They'd gone to all of this trouble to replace Benito Juez.
And the new guy was basically Juez but wearing a crown
maxil seems to have recognized the, this too early in his rule,
he actually wrote to wires whose forces were still holding out in the far north
and asked him to come back to Mexico city and be prime minister.
What he basically said was we're pretty much the same.
Why don't we stop the city war? You come back to the capital,
I'll make you prime minister and we can make Mexico into a liberal paradise
together. Counterfactual history.
It's interesting to speculate what might have happened if jus had said, sure,
why not? After all his program. And maxil really were that far apart.
If FARs had decided to throw in the towel and work with the new emperor,
it's entirely possible. Mexico would still be an Emper empire to this very day,
but jus he didn't need to are throwing the towel. By now,
the battle of Gettysburg had been over familiar year up north,
the union was on the verge of capturing Atlanta, the us civil war.
It was nearly over and uncle Sam was gonna be when he discovered all these
Frenchmen and pretend emperors playing in his backyard.
It's arguable that there never really was, uh, H points of maxillas reign,
just a series of endlessly decreasing lows.
His first year in power was spent in metaphorical battles with his conservative
backers over the direction of the am empire.
His second was spent in actual battles with Benito horror's ReMed Republican
troops.
By now the us civil war was over while a full on American invasion hadn't
happened.
Washington had started sending weapons and money over the border to hu as
guise suddenly the Republican forces were better armed and better paid than even
the French.
It was against this worrying background that Maximilian issued his most
controversial decree way back in 1861 when French troops had first landed in
Vera Cruz,
Juez had decreed that any foreign fighters who invaded Mexico would be put to
death. Now in 1865, maxil tried to do something similar on October. The third,
he promulgated the black decree saying that anyone caught fighting for EZs army
would be executed on the spot.
It was meant to be fighting fire with fire instead itself emulate max
millions, entire reign, no matter horror had deployed similar tactics.
Max millions decree was a war crime and everyone hated him for it.
Maxs hated him for murdering their countrymen.
The differentiated him for bringing their military into disrepute nor was it
just soldiers maxil was now also hated by the man keeping him in power by
January, 1866,
Napoleon III was sick and tired with his whole Mexican venture with his
pliable Papa who refused to be pliable with America,
suddenly demanding to know why he was garrisoning troops just below the ball.
So not long after he learned of the black decree,
he decided to cut maxilla loose on January the 15th, 1866 Napoleon.
The third announced French troops would begin withdrawing from Mexico.
16 days later, the Garrison Chihuahua simply walked out,
leaving the Imperial Mexican horses to their fate.
And that was really that for the so second Mexican empire over the following
months,
more and more French garrisons packed up and left leaving town after town wide
open for horror's forces.
As the Republican army swept down from the north gold Dred gripped everyone in
Mexico city on July the ninth,
Colorado left for Europe to turn to throw herself on Napoleon the thirds, mercy,
but Napoleon the third done with this crap. He just refused to help.
Shortly after Karl LA had a mental breakdown and was isolated in a family
castle, she'd never seen Mexico again,
but in the Mexican capital 1867 dawned with EZ is forces practically knocking
at the doors in an emergency meeting.
Maxil was told that he should abate and flee the country,
but still believing that he a voice of Mexico's porous.
The diluted emperor refused to abandon his people on February the fifth, 1867,
the remaining forces of the second Mexican em empire finally abandoned the
capital. They rode to the town of Tara,
barricaded themselves in and waited for horrors as army.
They would not have to wait very long.
The siege of quar was as painful for everyone inside as it was pointless.
Whereas his forces surrounded the town on March the fifth,
and then they simply waited for the inevitable inside the walls.
Provisions ran out. The remaining soldiers were forced to eat their horses.
After that everyone went hungry throughout the siege.
Maxillas said to have remained upbeat, trying to raise everyone's spirits.
It must have been an odd site.
This 34 year old Austrian strolling through a siege colonial city telling Bera
old Mexican soldiers in his bad Spanish to buck up old sport because it's not
ever yet. Iteming to wonder if maxilla ever reflected on his bizarre life,
on how he and Austrian Royal and up starving in a siege,
Mexican town, some 10,000 kilometers from home,
or maybe it simply never occurred to him that his life was bizarre at all.
The siege finally broke on may the 15th.
When a conservative officer opened a gate that where as his army in maxilla was
captured just under a month later, he was sentenced to death on June the 19th,
1867 maxil was led into a white wall courtyard under the burning sun and
made to face a fir squad. At the last moment, he was hurt to shout Viva Mexico.
Then there were several sharp cracks, some puffs of white smoke.
And the second emperor of was no more news and Maximilian's death reached
France on July. The first, just as Napoleon.
The third was making a speech at the world's fair. It caused outrage,
but I mean, what was Paris gonna do? Invade Mexico again for friends, Joseph,
the aftermath of his brothers in glorious death was an embarrassing time as it
was for many in Europe, as it was for many across the Atlantic two in Mexico,
Benito horrors was reelected presidents,
but then spent so many years trying to AMAs near dictatorial powers that he
became as unpopular as maxil.
He died in 1872 unloved with Mexico, still unstable.
It wasn't until the 20th century that he was reinvented as a national hero for
Napoleon the third. Well,
he didn't fare much better captured during an ill advised war against pressure.
In 1870,
he was deposed in a revolution a day later and sent to live in exile in Britain.
He died in bitter obscurity in 1873,
having never escaped his uncles outsized shadow.
The last person in our story to go was Carlota. After a breakdown in 80 in 66,
a former impressive Mexico lived in seclusion in Belgium, forever,
haunted by paranoia. She finally passed away in January, 1927,
nearly 50 years after our husband was executed in a dusty courtyard,
a whole ocean away.
And so we finally come to the biggest question of all was maxilla,
really a significant historical F or whilst his entire life.
Just this fluke of geopolitics pointless rule signify nothing.
Well,
maybe it's a bit of both it's doubtless that Maximilian was only ever really a
bit player in several much larger stories.
The story of his brother's rise of Napoleon,
the thirds hubris of Mexico's chaotic 19th and America, civil war,
but even the most minor characters can still be fascinating in their own way.
They can still elicit sympathy from an audience. And maxillas short,
pointless life has aspects that we can all relate to.
He was a man who lived in his brother's shadow, but for one tantalizing moment,
he managed to step out into the sun. He may have abused his,
his position with the black decree. He may have been a foreign dictator,
lording it over Mexico,
but Maximilian was also however briefly his own man.
When the history books were written,
they didn't read Maximilian brother re Fran Joseph,
but Maximilian the last Emer of Mexico. So I really hope you enjoyed that video.
If you did,
please do hit that thumbs up button below and don't forget to subscribe also.
Why not check out our sister channel geographics.
This one had a lot of geography in it. If you're into that,
I think you'll enjoy that other channel,
which I'm linking to below and as always, thank you for watching.
<Silence>.